Memory & Storage Classes

Learning Objectives
->Understand the storage classes of C.
->Know where variables are stored, what is their lifetime, and who can access them.
->Understand the relationship between RAM vs Flash vs Stack vs Heap.
->Be able to practically relate how these things work in embedded systems.


->Flash(program memory)
 Flash memory is a non-valatile memory.if power off then the memory do not erase.it store program code(text section)
 and constant data.

->SRAM(static ram)
 Static random-access memory (static RAM or SRAM) is a type of random-access memory (RAM) that uses 
 latching circuitry (flip-flop) to store each bit. SRAM is volatile memory, data is lost when power is removed.
 SRAM is faster than DRAM because it uses flip-flops to store data, which does not require refreshing, 
 unlike DRAM's capacitor-based cells that need periodic refreshes.

->DRAM needs to be refreshed because it stores data using tiny capacitors that gradually lose their electrical
 charge over time. Without periodic refreshing, the data would be lost as the charge leaks away. The refresh 
 process involves the memory controller reading the data and then rewriting it to recharge the capacitors, 
 ensuring the data remains intact. 

->data section — initialized global/static variables
 Global or static variables that are initially initialized with some value are in the .data section.
->.bss section — uninitialized global/static variables
 Global or static variables that are not initialized are in .bss.
->Stack — local variables, function calls
 Stack — Local variables, function calls
->Heap — dynamic memory allocation (malloc, calloc, free)
 this use when we need to atocate memory in runtime 
 ->malloc() → Memory Allocate
 It allocates a specified number of bytes from memory and returns the first address of that memory block.
 Only the total number of bytes is needed (e.g. malloc(20))
 ->calloc() → Contiguous Allocation
 Takes two parameters: the number of elements and the size of each
 ->free() → Memory Release
 The memory that you have taken with malloc() or calloc(),
 you have to free it from the Heap with free() after use.
 Otherwise, there will be a “Memory Leak” — meaning that the more 
 times the program runs, the more memory will be consumed but will not be returned.

->auto default
 Keyword: auto
 Storage: Stack
 Lifetime: While inside a function
 Scope: Only inside a function
 Default for: Local variables

->static
 Keyword: static
 Storage: .data or .bss section (SRAM)
 Lifetime: Lasts for the entire duration of the program
 Scope: If inside a function, it is only accessible from that function

->extern
 Keyword: extern
 Meaning: To declare a global variable or function in another file
 Storage: Depends on original definition
 Lifetime: As long as the entire program runs

->register

 Keyword: register
 Storage: CPU register (if compiler allows)
 Lifetime: While inside a function
 Scope: Local

 Register hint tells the compiler to store the variable in the CPU register instead of RAM for faster access.
 However, it is just a “hint”, it is up to the compiler to accept it or not. 

->What is the difference between static and global?
 A static global variable is visible only within that file, while a global variable is visible from all files.


 Why is volatile necessary?
 Because hardware or interrupts can change the value, preventing the compiler from performing optimization.

 

 What does const volatile mean?
 It's a hardware register—you can't write to it, but the hardware can change its value.



 What is the difference between auto and register?**
 auto variables are stored on the Stack, and register variables are a speed hint to the compiler to store them in a 
 CPU register.

 

 Where is a static local variable stored?
 In the .data or .bss section of SRAM(or main memory).


 Can a variable be defined using extern?
 No, it can only be declared.

